Forms library package design doc (#14369)
department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team: platform/engineering/design-docs/2020-09-24-package-forms-library.md

# Bundling the forms library as a Node package

**Author(s):** Brooks Johnson 
**Last Updated:** September 24, 2020  
**Status:** **Draft** | In Review | Approved  
**Approvers:** _Chris Valarida_ \[ \], _Michael Fleet_ \[ \], ...  

## Overview

### Objective

> The goal of this project is to define clear boundaries around the collection of code, markup, and styling that is referred to as "the forms library".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this project is to define clear boundaries around the collection of code, markup, and styling that is referred to as "the forms library."
```

> The goal of this project is to define clear boundaries around the collection of code, markup, and styling that is referred to as "the forms library".

Reviewer: What benefits do we gain from this?

Some non-goals are:

- Bug fixes to the forms library
- Adding new features to the forms library
- Refactoring the forms library beyond what is required to group the existing code together in the same package
- Establishing a separate build & publish pipeline for the forms library (yet)

The intended audience for this document is VSP and VFS frontend engineers.

### Background

> The forms library is a collection of React components, CSS, and JS that allows an app team to build a form application for `vets-website` using a combination of JSON schemas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The forms library is a collection of React components, CSS, and JS that allows an app team to build a form application for `vets-website` using a form configuration.
```

Right now in `vets-website` we have the following folders containing code for the forms library:

- `src/platform/forms`
- `src/platform/forms-system`

We also have forms-adjacent code in the form of other dependencies

- `@department-of-veterans-affairs/react-jsonschema-form` (See [Tighter dependencies](#tighter-dependencies))
- `vets-json-schema`

Additionally, the forms library code is entangled with other platform code as well as some app code.

#### Application entanglement

> [This definition file](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/720a867817f5b83bd1d713bd51202863b41739b1/src/platform/forms/definitions/nonMilitaryJobs.js#L1) in the forms library imports some app code, yet the file itself is _only_ used in other app code.

Reviewer: Give a little lead-in describing this section before jumping into examples. What do you mean by "application entanglement" and why is it a problem?

> There is a [helper file](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/applications/personalization/dashboard/helpers.jsx) in `src/applications/personalization` which exports a number of consts which are used in the following files within the forms library:

Reviewer: You already know this, but it's worth capturing here for posterity: I'm already [working on fixing this](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/pull/14468).

- [`ApplicationStatus.jsx`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/platform/forms/save-in-progress/ApplicationStatus.jsx#L6-L10)
- [`SaveInProgressIntro.jsx`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/platform/forms/save-in-progress/SaveInProgressIntro.jsx#L12-L15)
- [`FormSaved.jsx`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/platform/forms/save-in-progress/FormSaved.jsx#L10)
- [`AuthorizationComponent.jsx`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/platform/forms/components/AuthorizationComponent.jsx#L12)

> Finally, there are some testing helpers that live in the `src/applications/hca` directory and are used in forms library tests:

Reviewer: Ooh, good catch. :raised_hands:

- [`01-sip-autosave.e2e.spec.js`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/platform/forms/tests/save-in-progress/01-sip-autosave.e2e.spec.js#L4)
- [`01-sip-fail-load.e2e.spec.js`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/platform/forms/tests/save-in-progress/01-sip-load-fail.e2e.spec.js#L3)
- [`01-sip-finish-later.e2e.spec.js`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/platform/forms/tests/save-in-progress/01-sip-finish-later.e2e.spec.js#L4)
- [`01-sip-review.e2e.spec.js`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/cc4a3172edc242bf60c93aec5b170c734dc57985/src/platform/forms/tests/save-in-progress/01-sip-review.e2e.spec.js#L3)

#### Platform entanglement

In addition to the forms library, the platform provides other code that is used both in the forms library and in applications. 

- `utilities`
- `monitoring`
- `site-wide`
- `user`
- `static-data`

> These aren't _strictly_ part of the forms library, but since the forms library makes use of its parent platform code, it becomes more difficult to place clear boundaries around the forms library.

Reviewer: How is this pertinent to the forms library code isolation? Is this a problem? Why do I need to know this before I read the design proposal?

### High Level Design

The forms library will be consolidated into a single place and bundled as a Node package.
This will allow VFS teams to import it as if it were any other Node module.

> This change should not have a noticeable functional impact on individual app teams.
> Towards the end the only change that should be made on the app side of things is changing where forms library code/styles are imported from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change should introduce minimal functional impact on individual application teams.
The only application code changes will be updating the where forms library code and styles are imported from.
```

<!-- The source for this diagram is the `*.odg` file in the same directory, a LibreOffice Draw doc-->

> ![Forms library bundling](images/forms-library-package/forms-library-package.svg)

Reviewer: If you could trim off some of the whitespace at the end of this SVG, that'd help the document flow a little better.

## Specifics

> ### Detailed Design

Reviewer: Your outline for this section touches a lot of the salient points, but it was confusing to me in places because I was looking for a clear picture of the end goal, not how we get there.

I recommend covering the _process_ of getting to the end goal in the `Work Estimates` section and using the `Detailed Design` section to paint a picture of the end product.

> A few things will have to happen in order pave the way for additional changes that will bundle the forms library.

Reviewer: Change to active voice: `The VSP Design System team will...`

#### Preparation

> - The app-specific code mentioned in [Application Entanglement](#application-entanglement) will have to be moved so that it no longer lives in the forms library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Move the app-specific code mentioned in [Application Entanglement](#application-entanglement) outside the forms library directories.
```

> - Use the `no-unresolved-modules` ESLint plugin to [find & remove unused code](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team/issues/8763) in the `forms` and `forms-library` directories

Reviewer: Is this a non-goal? If so, this could definitely go in `Future Work`.
> Refactoring the forms library beyond what is required to group the existing code together in the same package

Author: I don't think so - I view it as removing pieces of code which do not need to be migrated into the `forms-library` package.

#### Beginning the bundling

> - Copy what remains from `forms` into `forms-system`

Reviewer: Should these be in an ordered list?

- Create `platform/packages/forms-library` and move the contents of `platform/forms-system` into it

> - Add a `package.json` file to the new `forms-library` package directory

Reviewer: What will go in this `package.json`? I'm most interested in dependencies and how they will impact the build process. For example, if I `yarn install` from the root, will it install the `forms-library` dependencies?

Author: I'm happy to report that a `yarn install` at the root of `vets-website` does install dependencies in the child `package.json`

Reviewer: I just tried this myself:
1) `cd src/platform/forms`
2) `npm init`
3) `yarn add chalk` (just to add a dependency)
4) `rm -rf node_modules`
5) `cd ../../../` (back to `vets-website` root)
6) `yarn`
7) `ls src/platform/forms`

No `node_modules` directory was present as sibling to the `package.json` I added in the sub-directory `src/platform/forms/`. :disappointed:

> - [Add an alias to the `.babelrc` file](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/055d96c54e1df54138b9efc589b98e55962333b3/.babelrc#L50-L55) that redirects imports from `platform/forms` and `platform/forms-system` to the new package

Reviewer: - Do we need to add an alias if the forms library is in `vets-website/package.json`'s `dependencies`?
- If we need an alias, does it need to be a Babel alias, or could it be a Webpack [`resolve.alias`](https://webpack.js.org/configuration/resolve/#resolvealias)?
  - What are the pros and cons of each?

> - Edit the webpack config & use a custom `sass-loader` importer to rewrite imports from `forms` to `forms-system`

Reviewer: This is probably fine, but why is this needed?

Author: Webpack will break when the sass-loader tries to import something like this after the SASS files have been moved:

https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/58c48c6fd116db6e875162f540a0d072678a68d2/src/applications/disability-benefits/all-claims/sass/disability-benefits.scss#L7

> - Fix broken relative imports

Reviewer: Should this happen during steps 1 and 2?

- Add babel configuration to the new package because according to [Babel's docs](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/config-files):

> 
> > Searching [for a config] will stop once a directory containing a `package.json` is found, so a relative config only applies within a single package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > Searching [for a config] will stop once a directory containing a `package.json` is found, so a relative config only applies within a single package
```

#### Clarifying boundaries

The [Platform Entanglement](#platform-entanglement) section mentions that forms library code imports from "parent" platform code. This makes the boundaries less clear, so an effort will be made to reduce or eliminate the forms library importing from platform code.

> - Move the `static-data/labels` file into the forms library, since it is only used in connection with forms library configuration

Reviewer: Link to the file in GitHub?

> - Prefer code that exists in the forms library, instead of in the parent platform directory.

Reviewer: - What does "prefer" mean? What's the action we'll take to establish a boundary?
- What if we preferred code in the platform directory? Pros? Cons?

>   - For example, we have a [`focusElement`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/46000a4becae29ca72b505889713fd4b2b2718f0/src/platform/utilities/ui/index.js#L17-L32) that exists in `platform/utilities/ui`, but also one that exists in [`forms-system/src/js/utilities/ui`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/46000a4becae29ca72b505889713fd4b2b2718f0/src/platform/forms-system/src/js/utilities/ui/index.js#L3-L18). This project would eliminate the duplicate code existing at the platform level and direct all imports to use the forms library version

Reviewer: > This project would eliminate the duplicate code existing at the platform level and direct all imports to use the forms library version

So you mean when platform code is only used for the forms library, move it to the forms library code base?

Author: Correct.

> - Try to remove imports from `platform/monitoring` and instead import the relevant code in outside of the forms library and pass them in as props or config options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remove imports from `platform/monitoring`
  - Instead, import the relevant code outside of the forms library and pass them in as props or config options.
```
Also, define "them."

>   - As an example, in the [`FormSignInModal`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/1cc955b8d4f6b9f93f4553fdd4afa9878c75564f/src/platform/forms/save-in-progress/FormSignInModal.jsx#L12) component, remove the `platform/monitoring/record-event` import and instead put that function call inside of the function that gets passed as a prop. `FormSignInModal` is only used from `platform/site-wide`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - As an example, in the [`FormSignInModal`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/1cc955b8d4f6b9f93f4553fdd4afa9878c75564f/src/platform/forms/save-in-progress/FormSignInModal.jsx#L12) component, remove the `platform/monitoring/record-event` import and instead put that function call inside of the function that gets passed as a prop. `FormSignInModal` is only used from `platform/site-wide`.
```

> - Remove forms library dependence on platform re-implementations of 3rd party functions, like lodash's `get` and `set`.

Reviewer: These are re-defined in the forms library code as well. Is the idea to only use those in the forms library code, or to use something else altogether?

  - Some of these examples will be easy to avoid the lodash functions entirely, but for others we should switch to the lodash functions instead of the platform versions, with a longer term goal being to get away from lodash altogether

> - Remove imports for `src/platform/utilities/environment` and instead rely on global `const`s from webpack's DefinePlugin for environment-related `const`s (i.e. an api url) or branching

Reviewer: Ooh, interesting. I hadn't considered this. Is this needed for the code isolation to be considered complete, or can it be added as future work?

#### Final touches

> Once the forms library is actually a package, app code can be updated to import from it directly instead of relying on the aliases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the forms library is actually a package, app code will be updated to import from it directly instead of relying on the aliases.
```

> - Each app team will update their code to use forms library JS & SCSS from the package instead of by direct path

Reviewer: Why use the direct path?

Author: We want the app code to look like this:

```js
import { foo } from 'forms-library/bar'
```

Instead of:

```js
import { foo } from `platform/packages/forms-library/bar`
```

This pattern treats the forms library as an actual package instead of just another directory.

> - Configure the `no-restricted-imports` ESLint rule to [restrict imports of `src/platform/packages` directly](https://eslint.org/docs/rules/no-restricted-imports)

Reviewer: This is great! What about the other way around? Can we also restrict application code imports from the package code?

- Remove the `.babelrc` forms-library alias & custom SASS importer

### Code Location

The forms library package will live in `src/platform/packages/forms-library`.

> Since it will be a Node package, it will be added to the `package.json` file and apps will import it as a regular Node package instead of by its direct path.

Author: This isn't in conflict with the babel alias, but you are right that it (the babel alias) is only temporary anyway.  The alias will redirect imports using `platform/forms/...` and `platform/forms-system/...` to `src/platform/packages/forms-library`. In `package.json`, we will have something like this:

```json

  "dependencies": {
    ...
    "forms-library":  "./src/platform/packages/forms-library",
}
```

So it's sort of like a many-to-one relationship.

### Testing Plan

We have ESLint rules in place which can verify that the right JS is imported as it relates to the forms library.
Additionally, many of the end-to-end tests will fail if the forms library is not imported properly, so they will help with awareness.

> We don't have any automation in place to validate that the right SASS files are imported (other than webpack failing to resolve the file), so testing that forms styling is working properly will be a manual process using the browser dev tools.

Reviewer: How might we automate this?

Author: Visual regression testing :grin:

Reviewer: We could set up local VRT, actually. That's not too painful, I think. It's automated VRT that's the beast.

### Logging

N/A

### Debugging

Since this project isn't about changing functionality of the forms library, we don't need to add any debugging tools. Validating that the app code can still access the forms library in its new location will be enough.

### Caveats

Though we will be creating a package for the forms library, we will not be following semantic versioning since it is _just_ a package and not a published module.
The additional overhead of updating the forms-library's `package.json` file and updating the `yarn.lock` file in `vets-website` to target the newest (but unpublished) version seems like a burden without much benefit.

### Security Concerns

N/A

### Privacy Concerns

N/A

> ### Open Questions and Risks

Reviewer: More questions you can either answer in the document or add to this section:
- Will the forms library be pre-transpiled as it would be if it were published?
  - Will engineers be required to commit `dist/` (or whatever we call the directory containing the transpiled code)?
- Will the forms library manage its own dependencies?
  - How are dependencies of the forms library installed?
  - How do we move dependencies from `vets-website/package.json` to the forms library `package.json` and ensure we're not breaking anything?
  - How will we manage shared dependencies like `React`? (Will we have to?)
- Will the `vets-website` unit test runner also run the forms library unit tests, or will that be a different command and step in CI?

Do we want to separate the forms library build & testing stages from the main `vets-website` build? By easing the load of what webpack and mocha are doing, we could speed things up. The downside is that since we wouldn't be running the forms library tests with every merge into master, we would have to have some other automation in place to make sure that any changes to `src/platform/packages/forms-library` passes the forms library tests.

### Work Estimates

#### Prep work

This involves removing unused forms code and rearranging things so that the forms library doesn't import from app code.

**Estimate:** < 1 day

#### Creating the package

This captures the bulk of the work. Consolidating the forms library code into a single location, fixing broken imports, updating babel and webpack configuration.

**Estimate**: < 4 days

#### Creating the boundaries

Once the package is created, there will still be pieces of code that will need to be shifted around in order to firmly solidfy the boundaries around the forms library.

**Estimate:** < 1 week

#### Updating app code

> By this point, the package will already exist, but due to some babel and webpack config it will be masquerading as if it were still spread across `platform/forms` and `platform/forms-system`. This is where each app team updates their code to import directly from the new package.

Reviewer: Should it be up to the app teams? Can we automate this with a simple find-and-replace? A codemod?

Once app teams have done this, we will be able to remove those temporary configs and add an ESLint rule to prevent direct imports from `platform/packages/forms-library` in order to make sure that the forms library is treated like a package moving forward.

Actual active time here will be fairly low (< 1 day), and will involve waiting for app teams before we will be able to finish the platform changes.

### Alternatives

See the section [Separate repo](#separate-repo) in Future Work. We are avoiding turning the forms library into its own node module with a separate repo because of the additional overhead involved in publishing, setting up CI pipelines, and general additional repo management. This _may_ be a path for the future.
Another reason why we don't want to do this right now is that we would lost the advantage of the ESLint configuration that is part of `vets-website`.
Once this configuration is published we will be able to import it into any repo, and at that point it may make sense to move the forms library out of `vets-website`.

> Another alternative would be to move the forms library build out of the overall `vets-website` build. One advantage of this would be saving time, since the forms library could be built once and then all apps could use the cached version. However, on my machine a webpack build takes about 30 seconds, so shaving a few seconds off of this time will not be a huge benefit compared to how long it takes to do a full build with content. The downside of this would be added complexity for managing which forms library build to use (i.e. production, localhost, staging), and CI builds would either have to increase pipeline complexity by dealing with cached builds or lose the time savings altogether. This increase in complexity for marginal time savings does not seem worth it.

Reviewer: > ...since the forms library could be built once and then all apps could use the cached version.

In your current proposal the forms library package not building itself? If not, this implicitly ties the forms library to the babel and webpack configurations used to build the applications. Does that go against the stated "clear boundary" goal of this forms library package?

> The goal of this project is to define clear boundaries around the collection of code, markup, and styling that is referred to as "the forms library".

### Future Work

#### Separate repo

One possible option would be to take the package out of `vets-website` and give it its own repo.

> With this, we could publish it to npm, and we could completely remove the forms build & test process from `vets-website`, possibly speeding things up since we could avoid running forms tests on every build.

Reviewer: > ...we could completely remove the forms build & test process from `vets-website`...

Is this contradictory to the question you posed in `Open Questions & Risks`?'

> Do we want to separate the forms library build & testing stages from the main `vets-website` build?

#### Tighter dependencies

> Having a `package.json` specific to the forms library will allow us to treat it more like a product that we provide to VFS teams. It will be separate from the rest of the code in `vets-website`, so we could eliminate lodash from the forms library, or replace `moment` with something more appropriate without affecting the rest of the frontend.

Author: Oops, this wasn't very clear. I wasn't saying that adding a `package.json` is future work - but we could do some work to change/improve the forms library dependencies if we wanted to.

### Caveats

Though we will be creating a package for the forms library, we will not be following semantic versioning since it is _just_ a package and not a published module.
The additional overhead of updating the forms-library's `package.json` file and updating the `yarn.lock` file in `vets-website` to target the newest (but unpublished) version would be a burden without much benefit.

### Security Concerns

N/A

### Privacy Concerns

N/A

### Open Questions and Risks

#### Do we want to run forms library unit tests on each CI build+deploy

The current plan is to run forms library unit tests each time the forms library source is changed. Would we gain any additional protection by also running these on each deploy?

### Work Estimates

Note: These estimates do not account for extensive support requests

#### Preparation

**Estimate:** < 1 day

1. Move the app-specific code mentioned in [Application Entanglement](#application-entanglement) outside the forms library directories.
1. Use the `no-unresolved-modules` ESLint plugin to [find & remove unused code](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team/issues/8763) in the `forms` and `forms-library` directories

> #### Beginning the bundling

Reviewer: Do all of these steps need to be in one PR?

1. Add a `package.json` file to the new `forms-library` package directory
    - Any dependencies that are exclusively used by the forms library will go in here, and a `yarn install` from the `vets-website` root will install them.
    - Shared dependencies (like `react` and `react-redux`) will be configured to be [peer dependencies](https://flaviocopes.com/npm-peer-dependencies/)
1. [Add a temporary alias to the `.babelrc` file](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/055d96c54e1df54138b9efc589b98e55962333b3/.babelrc#L50-L55) that redirects imports from `platform/forms` and `platform/forms-system` to the new package
1. Edit the webpack config & use a custom `sass-loader` importer to _temporarily_ rewrite imports from `forms` to `forms-system`
    - This will prevent webpack from failing when it can't resolve the `.scss` files
1. Fix broken relative imports
1. Add babel configuration to the new package because according to [Babel's docs](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/config-files):
    > Searching [for a config] will stop once a directory containing a `package.json` is found, so a relative config only applies within a single package

> 

Reviewer: We also need to add the forms library as a dependency in the root `package.json` as well, right?

- Remove imports from `platform/monitoring`
  - Instead, import the relevant code outside of the forms library and pass them in as props or config options.
  - As an example, in the [`FormSignInModal`](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/blob/1cc955b8d4f6b9f93f4553fdd4afa9878c75564f/src/platform/forms/save-in-progress/FormSignInModal.jsx#L12) component, remove the `platform/monitoring/record-event` import and instead put that function call inside of the function that gets passed as a prop. `FormSignInModal` is only used from `platform/site-wide`.
- Remove forms library dependence on platform re-implementations of 3rd party functions, like lodash's `get` and `set`. Use the forms library implementations where possible.
- Remove imports for `src/platform/utilities/environment` and instead rely on global `const`s from webpack's DefinePlugin for environment-related `const`s (i.e. an api url) or branching

#### Package configuration

**Estimate:** 3-5 days

> This is separate from updating the imports. We want the forms library not to depend on the "global" webpack & mocha configuration for `vets-website`, so we will add appropriate config files so that it can be built and tested as a standalone package.

Reviewer: Don't forget to add these config files to the list below.

- CircleCI config to run forms library unit test on forms library changes

> - `vets-website` changes to config/scripts to prevent the forms library from getting build & tested as part of each PR

Reviewer: Which config and scripts?

#### Final touches (updating app code)

By this point, the package will already exist, but due to some babel and webpack config it will be masquerading as if it were still spread across `platform/forms` and `platform/forms-system`. This is where we open a PR for each app team and update their code to import directly from the new package. Separate PRs for each app team will make each one easier to merge without requiring a codeowner review from every single team.

- Update app code to use forms library JS & SCSS from the package instead of by direct path. This will help to establish the boundaries of the package for VFS teams.
- Configure the `no-restricted-imports` ESLint rule to [restrict imports of `src/platform/packages` directly](https://eslint.org/docs/rules/no-restricted-imports)

> - Add an `.eslintrc` file to the new forms library package and configure `no-restricted-imports` to block imports from application code and platform code.

Reviewer: Should this be in the `Package configuration` section?

- Remove the `.babelrc` forms-library alias & custom SASS importer

Once app teams approve these PRs that we create, we will be able to remove those temporary configs and add an ESLint rule to prevent direct imports from `platform/packages/forms-library` in order to make sure that the forms library is treated like a package moving forward.

Actual active time here will be fairly low (1-2 days), and will involve waiting for app teams before we will be able to finish the platform changes.

### Alternatives

See the section [Separate repo](#separate-repo) in Future Work. We are avoiding turning the forms library into its own node module with a separate repo because of the additional overhead of:

- publishing the package
- setting up CI pipelines
- additional repo management.

This _may_ be a path for the future.

Another reason why we don't want to do this right now is that we would lost the advantage of the ESLint configuration that is part of `vets-website`.
Once this configuration is published we will be able to import it into any repo, and at that point it may make sense to move the forms library out of `vets-website`.

> 

Reviewer: Based on our conversation today, we still need to decide decide yarn workspaces vs path dependency. Once we make that decision, the alternative should go here.
